New tutorial for chloroplast genome assembly (#2122)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/assembly/tutorials/chloroplast-assembly/tutorial.md

questions:
  - "How can we assemble a chloroplast genome?"
objectives:
  - "Assemble a chloroplast genome from long reads"
  - "Polish the assembly with short reads"
  - "Map reads to the assembly and view"
  - "View an annotated assembly"
time_estimation: "2h"
key_points:
  - "A chloroplast genome can be assembled with long reads and polished with short reads"
  - "The assembly graph is useful to look at and think about genomic structure"
  - "We can map raw reads back to the assembly and investigate areas of high or low read coverage"
  - "We can view an assembly, its mapped reads, and its annotations in JBrowse"
contributors:
  - annasyme
---

# Introduction
{:.no_toc}

## What is genome assembly?

Genome assembly is the process of joining together DNA sequencing fragments into longer pieces, ideally up to chromosome lengths.The DNA fragments are produced by DNA sequencing machines, and are called "reads". These are in lengths of about 150 nucleotides (base pairs), to up to a million+ nucleotides, depending on the sequencing technology used. Currently, most reads are from Illumina (short), PacBio (long) or Oxford Nanopore (long and extra-long).

> It is difficult to assemble plant genomes as they are often large (for example, 3,000,000,000 base pairs), have many repeat regions (such as transposons), and may be polyploid. This tutorial shows genome assembly for a smaller data set - the plant chloroplast genome - a single circular chromosome which is typically about 160,000 base pairs. We will use a subset of a real data set from sweet potato, from the paper {% cite Zhou2018 %}.

Author: Thank you, have added point noting likely evolution of chloroplast from cyanobacteria; sizes of nuclear and chloroplast genome in paragraph 2.

>### Agenda
> In this tutorial we will deal with:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# Upload data

> Let's start with uploading the data.

Author: I think this is good but beyond the scope currently.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Import the data
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial and give it a proper name
>
>    {% include snippets/create_new_history.md %}
>    {% include snippets/rename_history.md %}
>
> 2. Import from [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/record/3567224) or a data library (ask your instructor):
>   - FASTQ file with illumina reads: `sweet-potato-chloroplast-illumina-reduced.fastq`
>   - FASTQ file with nanopore reads: `sweet-potato-chloroplast-nanopore-reduced.fastq`
>   - Note: make sure to import the files with "reduced" in the names, not the ones with "tiny" in the names.
>    ```
>    https://zenodo.org/record/3567224/files/sweet-potato-chloroplast-illumina-reduced.fastq
>    https://zenodo.org/record/3567224/files/sweet-potato-chloroplast-nanopore-reduced.fastq    
>    ```
>
>    {% include snippets/import_via_link.md %}
>    {% include snippets/import_from_data_library.md %}
{: .hands_on}

# Check read quality

> We will look at the quality of the nanopore reads.

Author: These reads are high quality so don't need filtering but the Q&A section talks about what sorts of things are useful to consider. I want to avoid a tutorial that is too long so have not covered QC in detail here but I will point to other tutorials that cover it in more detail.

>    - *"Type of file to work on"*: `fastq`
>    - *"files"*: select the `nanopore FASTQ file`
{: .hands_on}

There are five output files. Look at the `HTML report` to learn about the read quality.

> ### {% icon question %} Question
> What summary statistics would be useful to look at?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> > This will depend on the aim of your analysis, but usually:
> > * **Sequencing depth** (the number of reads covering each base position; also called "coverage"). Higher depth is usually better, but at very high depths it may be better to subsample the reads, as errors can swamp the assembly graph.
> > * **Sequencing quality** (the quality score indicates probability of base call being correct). You may trim or filter reads on quality. Phred quality scores are logarithmic: phred quality 10 = 90% chance of base call being correct; phred quality 20 = 99% chance of base call being correct. More detail [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phred_quality_score).
> > * **Read lengths** (read lengths histogram, and reads lengths vs. quality plots). Your analysis or assembly may need reads of a certain length.
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

*Optional further steps:*

> * Find out the quality of your reads using other tools such as fastp or FastQC.

Author: The read lengths and quality are further explored in the read mapping section; I think this will suffice here

* To visualize base quality using emoji you can also use FASTQE.
* Run FASTQE for the illumina reads. In the output, look at the mean values (the middle row)
* Repeat FASTQE for the nanopore reads. In the tool settings, increase the maximum read length to 30000.

# Assemble reads

> We will assemble the long nanopore reads.

Author: This is probably better achieved by users looking at the GitHub code READMEs. I will add in a note to direct users there for more information.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Assemble reads
> 1. **Flye** {% icon tool %}:
>    - *"Input reads"*: `sweet-potato-chloroplast-nanopore-reduced.fastq`
>    - *"Estimated genome size"*: `160000`
>    - *Leave other settings as default*
{: .hands_on}

There are five output files.
* *Note: this tool is heuristic; your results may differ slightly from the results here, and if repeated.*
* View the `log` file and scroll to the end.
* How many contigs (fragments) were assembled?
* What is the length of the assembly?
* View the `assembly_info` file.
* What are the contig names and lengths?

> * The assembly sequence is in the `consensus`. Re-name this `flye-assembly.fasta`

Author: This seems clear to me but happy to hear any suggestions.

> * The assembly sequence is in the `consensus`. Re-name this `flye-assembly.fasta`

Reviewer: I suggest to group the questions and include them in a Questions and Solutions box. It is nice tutorial, congratulations.

> * The assembly sequence is in the `consensus`. Re-name this `flye-assembly.fasta`

Author: Thanks @gallardoalba - I will re-arrange this bit

>    - *"Node length labels"*: `Yes`
>    - *Leave other settings as default*
{: .hands_on}

Your assembly graph may look like this:

![assembly graph](../../images/sweet-potato-assembly-graph.png "Assembly graph of the nanopore reads, for the sweet potato chloroplast genome. In your image, some of the labels may be truncated; this is a known bug under investigation.")

> ### {% icon question %} Question
> What is your interpretation of this assembly graph?
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> > One interpretation is that this represents the typical circular chloroplast structure: There is a long single-copy region (the node of around 78,000 bp), connected to the inverted repeat (a node of around 28,000 bp), connected to the short single-copy region (of around 11,000 bp). In the graph, each end loop is a single-copy region (either long or short) and the centre bar is the collapsed inverted repeat which should have about twice the sequencing depth.
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

*Optional further steps:*
* Repeat the Flye assembly with different parameters, and/or a filtered read set.

> * Try an alternative assembly tool, such as Canu or Unicycler.

Author: Great idea, shall do this

>    - *"Reference genome to display"*: `Use a genome from history`
>        - *"Select a reference genome"*: `polished-assembly.fasta`
>    - *"Produce Standalone Instance"*: `Yes`
>    - *"Genetic Code"*: `11. The Bacterial, Archaeal and Plant Plastid Code`
>    - *"JBrowse-in-Galaxy Action"*: `New JBrowse instance`
>    - *"Insert Track Group"*
>        - *"Insert Annotation Track"*
>            - *"Track Type"*: `BAM pileups`
>            - *"BAM track data"*: `nanopore-tiny.bam`
>            - *"Autogenerate SNP track"*: `No`
>            - *Leave the other track features as default*
>        - *"Insert Annotation Track"*.
>            - *"Track Type"*: `BAM pileups`
>            - *"BAM track data"*: `illumina-tiny.bam`
>            - *"Autogenerate SNP track"*: `No`
>            - *Leave the other track features as default*
{: .hands_on}

There is one output file: re-name: `assembly-and-reads`
* Click on the eye icon to view. (For more room, collapse Galaxy side menus with corner < > signs).
*  Make sure the bam files are ticked in the left hand panel.
* Choose a contig in the drop down menu. Zoom in and out with + and - buttons.

> ![read mapping](../../images/jbrowse-read-mapping-zoomed-out.png "Overview of reads mapped back to the assembly")

Reviewer 2: if you like, you can embed a real jbrowse here if the data is an ok size? There's an example in https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/assembly/tutorials/ecoli_comparison/tutorial.html#visualising-the-genome / https://github.com/galaxyproject/training-material/blob/master/topics/assembly/tutorials/ecoli_comparison/tutorial.md#jbrowse

Author: Thanks, sounds good - I will try it now

Author: This seems to work now

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> 1. What are the differences between the nanopore and the illumina reads?
> 2. What are some reasons that the read coverage may vary across the reference genome?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solutions
> > 1. Nanopore reads are longer and have a higher error rate.  
> > 2. There may be lots of reasons for varying read coverage. Some possibilities: In areas of high read coverage: this region may be a collapsed repeat. In areas of low or no coverage: this region may be difficult to sequence; or, this region may be a misassembly.
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

# Annotate the assembly

> We can now annotate our assembled genome with information about genomic features. A chloroplast genome annotation tool is not yet available in Galaxy. Instead, we can use a web-based tool to annotate (or upload an example annotation).

Reviewer: It states that there is not an available tool in Galaxy for annotating chloroplastic and mitochondrial genomes, but Prokka can be used for that, according to different publications. It would be interesting to compare the results obtained with Prokka and those obtained with GeSeq.

Author: Thank you for this suggestion, I have added it in the text as an option but will keep GeSeq for now as it uses a customised reference dataset and likely provides a better annotation.

Follow these steps to annotate your assembly, or upload an example annotation file from this [Zenodo link](http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4267171) to your current Galaxy history, and skip to the next step.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Annotate with GeSeq
> * Download `polished.fasta` to your computer (click on the file in your history; then click on the disk icon).
> * In a new broswer tab, go to [Chlorobox](https://chlorobox.mpimp-golm.mpg.de/geseq.html) where we will use the [GeSeq tool](https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/45/W1/W6/3806659) to annotate our sequence.

> > * Upload the `fasta` file there. Information about how to use the tool is available on the page.

Reviewer: It is necessary to provide some auxiliary information about how to use the tool. And why don't add the tool into Galaxy?

Author: I think it's better to direct users to the most up-to-date usage info on the GeSeq website for longevity. It would be great to have this tool in Galaxy.

> * Once the annotation is completed, download the required files.
> * In Galaxy, import the annotation `GFF3` file.
{: .hands_on}

Make a JBrowse file to view the annotations (the GFF3 file) under the assembly (the polished.fasta file).

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: View annotations
> 1. **JBrowse genome browser** {% icon tool %}:
>        - *"Reference genome to display"*: `Use a genome from history`
>    - *"Select a reference genome"*: `polished-assembly.fasta`

> >    - *"Produce Standalone Instance"*: `Yes`

Reviewer 2: Would it make sense to only make one jbrowse instance, at the end? If not, you can also use the option to "build on an existing jbrowse" here, which might be nice for users to see 100% of their data in one instance, at the end.

Author: Thanks @hexylena this sounds good - I will look into it now

Author: I think I will keep them separate as it's easier to see tracks, hope that's ok.

Reviewer 2: Sure, that's fine. Up to you.

Reviewer 2: I noticed you weren't using the feature, but you can name the track groups if that helps, I think currently they all go into an "unnamed" grouping which I can definitely see being confusing. But it's fine to keep it as it is, if you prefer!

> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> > One reason is that these are predictions from different tools - such as BLAT or HMMER.
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

# Repeat with new data

*Optional extension exercise*

We can assemble another chloroplast genome using sequence data from a different plant species: the snow gum, *Eucalyptus pauciflora*. This data is from {% cite Wang2018 %}. It is a subset of the original FASTQ read files (Illumina - SRR7153063, Nanopore - SRR7153095).

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Assembly and annotation
> * Get data: at this [Zenodo link](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3600662), then upload to Galaxy.
> * Check reads: Run Nanoplot on the nanopore reads.
> * Assemble: Use Flye to assemble the nanopore reads, then get Fasta statistics *Note: this may take several hours.*
> * Polish assembly: Use Pilon to polish the assembly with short Illumina reads. *Note: Don't forget to map these Illumina reads to the assembly first using bwa-mem, then use the resulting `bam` file as input to Pilon.*
> * Annotate: Use the GeSeq tool at [Chlorobox](https://chlorobox.mpimp-golm.mpg.de/geseq.html).

> > * View annotations:Use <ss>JBrowse to view the assembled, annotated genome.

Reviewer: In order to repeat the analysis with different data, it states that each step should be repeated manually, instead of using the workflow previously generated.

Author: I'd rather keep it as it is to encourage repetition of steps, to cement the knowledge and skills.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Map reads
> 1. **Map with BWA-MEM** {% icon tool %}:
>    - *"Will you select a reference genome from your history"*: `Use a genome from history`
>    - *"Use the following dataset as the reference sequence"*: `flye-assembly.fasta`
>    - *"Algorithm for constructing the BWT index"*: `Auto. Let BWA decide`
>    - *"Single or Paired-end reads"*: `Single`
>    - *"Select fastq dataset"*: `sweet-potato-illumina-reduced.fastq`
>    - *"Set read groups information?"*: `Do not set`
>    - *"Select analysis mode"*: `Simple Illumina mode`
{: .hands_on}

* This maps the short reads to the assembly, and creates an alignment file.
* Re-name this file `illumina.bam`

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Polish
> 1. **pilon** {% icon tool %}:
>    - *"Source for reference genome used for BAM alignments"*: `Use a genome from history`
>    - *"Select a reference genome"*: `flye-assembly.fasta`
>    - *"Type automatically determined by pilon"*: `Yes`
>    - *"Input BAM file"*: `illumina.bam`
>    - *"Variant calling mode"*: `No`
>    - *"Create changes file"*: `Yes`

> {: .hands_on}
> 
> * This compares the short reads to the assembly, and creates a polished (corrected) assembly file.
> * There are two outputs: a `fasta` file and a `changes` file.
> * What is in the `changes` file?
> * Re-name the fasta output file `polished-assembly.fasta`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>  2. Rename the fasta output to `polished-assembly.fasta`
>
>    {% include snippets/rename_dataset.md name="polished-assembly.fasta" %}
>
{: .hands_on}

* This compares the short reads to the assembly, and creates a polished (corrected) assembly file.
* There are two outputs: a `fasta` file and a `changes` file.
* What is in the `changes` file?
```

Author: sorry I tried to commit this suggestion but I've done something odd - so will add this in manually on my copy and commit from there. thanks!

> * Find and run the tool called "Fasta statistics" on the original flye assembly and the polished version.

Reviewer 2: This should probably be in the hands-on box too, right? (Judging that since it isn't one of the "optional further steps"

Author: thanks, have added this

> * This creates one output file: re-name it `nanopore-tiny.bam`
{: .hands_on}

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Visualise mapped reads
> 1. **JBrowse genome browser** {% icon tool %}:
>    - *"Reference genome to display"*: `Use a genome from history`
>        - *"Select a reference genome"*: `polished-assembly.fasta`
>    - *"Produce Standalone Instance"*: `Yes`
>    - *"Genetic Code"*: `11. The Bacterial, Archaeal and Plant Plastid Code`
>    - *"JBrowse-in-Galaxy Action"*: `New JBrowse instance`
>    - *"Insert Track Group"*
>        - *"Insert Annotation Track"*
>            - *"Track Type"*: `BAM pileups`
>            - *"BAM track data"*: `nanopore-tiny.bam`
>            - *"Autogenerate SNP track"*: `No`
>            - *Leave the other track features as default*
>        - *"Insert Annotation Track"*.
>            - *"Track Type"*: `BAM pileups`
>            - *"BAM track data"*: `illumina-tiny.bam`
>            - *"Autogenerate SNP track"*: `No`
>            - *Leave the other track features as default*
{: .hands_on}

> There is one output file: re-name: `assembly-and-reads`

Reviewer 2: Maybe move to hands-on box

>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solutions
> > 1. Nanopore reads are longer and have a higher error rate.  
> > 2. There may be lots of reasons for varying read coverage. Some possibilities: In areas of high read coverage: this region may be a collapsed repeat. In areas of low or no coverage: this region may be difficult to sequence; or, this region may be a misassembly.
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

# Annotate the assembly

We can now annotate our assembled genome with information about genomic features.
* A chloroplast genome annotation tool is not yet available in Galaxy, although for an approximation we could use the tool for bacterial genome annotation, Prokka.
* However here we will use a web-based tool designed for chloroplast genomes to annotate our assembly (or, you can upload an example annotation).

Follow these steps to annotate your assembly, or upload an example annotation file from this [Zenodo link](http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4267171) to your current Galaxy history, and skip to the next step.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Annotate with GeSeq
> * Download `polished.fasta` to your computer (click on the file in your history; then click on the disk icon).

> > * In a new broswer tab, go to [Chlorobox](https://chlorobox.mpimp-golm.mpg.de/geseq.html) where we will use the [GeSeq tool](https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/45/W1/W6/3806659) to annotate our sequence.

Reviewer 2: This should use a citation, probably, rather than a link to the article.

Author: perfect, thank you!

> * Upload the `fasta` file there. Information about how to use the tool is available on the page.
> * Once the annotation is completed, download the required files.
> * In Galaxy, import the annotation `GFF3` file.
{: .hands_on}

Make a JBrowse file to view the annotations (the GFF3 file) under the assembly (the polished.fasta file).

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: View annotations
> 1. **JBrowse genome browser** {% icon tool %}:
>        - *"Reference genome to display"*: `Use a genome from history`
>    - *"Select a reference genome"*: `polished-assembly.fasta`
>    - *"Produce Standalone Instance"*: `Yes`
>    - *"Genetic Code"*: `11. The Bacterial, Archaeal and Plant Plastid Code`
>    - *"JBrowse-in-Galaxy Action"*: `New JBrowse instance`
>    - *"Insert Track Group"*
>        - *"Insert Annotation Track"*
>            - *"Track Type"*: `GFF/GFF3/BED/GBK Features`
>            - *"GFF/GFF3/BED Track Data"*: the `GFF3` file
>            - *Leave the other track features as default*
{: .hands_on}

> This may take a few minutes. There is one output file: re-name it `view-annotations`

Reviewer 2: This should probably be a hands-on step as well?
